General Relativity 02 - Manifold and tensor fields

[< prev](/read.php?page=wald-gr/gr-01)
[next >](/read.php?page=wald-gr/gr-03)

(This is from Charpter 2.2 of Wald)

### Vectors

In GR, we discuss about spaces that are not exactly flat. If we can split the space into parts and each part is continously corresponsive to a region of $\mathbb R^n$, then it is called a manifold. $n$ is called toe dimension of the manifold.

Normally, a finite dimensional manifold can be embeded in a higher dimensional Euclidean space. Whereas such embedding might not be natural. In GR, the spacetime does not naturally live in a higher dimensional space, so an abstract definition of a manifold is necessary.

**Definition (Manifold)**: An n-dimensional, $C^\infty$, real manifold $M$ is a set together with a collection of subsets $\{O_\alpha\}$ satisfying the following properties:

1. $\{O_\alpha\}$ is a open cover of $M$.
2. For each $\alpha$, there is a one-to-one, onto, map $\psi_\alpha: O_\alpha \to U_\alpha$ where $U_\alpha$ is an open subset of $\mathbb R^n$.
3. For each $O_\alpha$ and $O_\beta$ that $O_\alpha \cap O_\beta \neq \emptyset$, the map $\psi_\beta \circ \psi_\alpha^{-1}$ maps $\psi_\alpha[O_\alpha \cap O_\beta] \subset U_\alpha$ to $\psi_\beta[O_\alpha \cap O_\beta] \subset U_\beta$. Then both sets must be open and the map must be $C^\infty$.

Each map $\psi_\alpha$ is called a "**chart**" or a "**coordinate system**". The definition of $C^k$ manifold and complex manifold simply is the same with some natural changes.

Through out this book, the manifold involed are all assumed to be Hausdorff and paracomact.

> **NOTE** By this definition, the charts, by no means, are required to provide a "straight coordinate" to $\mathbb R^n$, by which I mean the tangent vector can change through out each $O_\alpha$.

**Example** Euclidean space $\mathbb R^n$ with one chart and map to be identity function.

**Example** 2-sphere (a 2-dimensional spherical surface embedded in $\mathbb R^3$).

In SR, each coordinate system is applicable to the whole universe. but in GR, a coordinate system is only usable inside its corresponding open set.

---

With the mapping to $\mathbb R^n$, we can easily define differentiability and smoothness of maps between manifolds.

**Defintion (Diffeomorphism)**: Let $M$ and $M'$ to be manifolds and $\{\psi_\alpha\}$ and $\{\psi_\beta\}$ to be chart maps. A map $f:M\to M'$ is said to be $C^\infty$ if for each $\psi'_\beta \circ f \circ \psi_\alpha^{-1}$ is $C^\infty$ in Euclidean spaces. If $f$ is $C^\infty$, one-to-one and onto, then it is called a **diffeomorphism**, and $M$ and $M'$ are said to be **diffeomorphic**.

> **NOTE** diffeomorphism requires the manifolds to have the same dimension.

---

### Tangent vector in a manifold (without embedding in $\mathbb R^n$):

We can define tangent vectors as directional derivatives. In $\mathbb R^n$, the mapping between vectors and directional derivatives is one-to-one. $(v^1,...,v^n)$ defines derivative operator $\sum_\mu v^n(\partial/\partial x^\mu)$. Directional derivatives are characterized by **Leibnitz rules**.

Let $\mathcal F$ denote the collections of all $C^\infty$ functions from manifold $M$ into $\mathbb R$. We define a tangent vector $v$ at point $p \in M$ to be a map $v: \mathcal F \to \mathbb R$ which is (1) linear and (2) obeys Leibnitz rules: $\forall f,g \in \mathcal F, a, b \in R,$

1. $v(af+bg)=av(f) + bv(g)$
2. $v(fg) = f(p)v(g) + g(p)v(f)$

>**NOTE**: Be very careful that the second rule also applies the function $f$ and $g$ at $p$.

**Prop**: $h\in\mathcal F,\ \forall q \in M, h(q) = c \text{ (constant) } \implies v(h) = 0$

_Proof_.
$$\begin{align*}
p \mapsto h(p)h(p) &= p \mapsto ch(p) \implies hh = ch\\
v(hh) &= 2h(p)v(h) = 2cv(h)\quad,\, \text{whereas}\\
v(ch) &= cv(h)\quad,\text{therefore} \\
cv(h) &= 0 \\
\end{align*}$$
If $c = 0$, $v(h) = 0$ since linearlity, otherwise divide the equation by $c$, and $v(h) = 0$. $\square$

The maps of a tangent vectors of a point $p$ forms a vector space by adding this addition law: $\forall a \in \mathbb R, v_1 + av_2 \equiv h \mapsto v_1(h) + av_2(h)$.

**Prop**:

**Theorem 2.2.1**: Let $M$ be an $n$-dimensional manifold. Let $p\in M$ and let $V_p$ denote the tangent space at $p$, then $\mathrm {dim}(V_p) = n$.

_Proof_. Given a chart $\psi$ of open set $O$ where $p \in O$, If $f \in \mathcal F$, then $f\circ \psi^{-1} \to \mathbb R$ is $C^\infty$. For $\mu = 1, ..., n$ define functional $X_{p,\mu}: \mathcal F \to \mathbb R$ by
$$\begin{align*}
X_{p,\mu}[f] &= \frac{\partial}{\partial x^\mu}\left[f\circ\psi^{-1}\right](\psi(p)) \\
\end{align*}$$

This means, the $\mu$th component of $X$ is a functional that takes the $\mu$th partial derivative of function $f\circ\psi^{-1}$ in $\mathbb R^n$, and apply the point $\psi(p)$ to it.
It is clear that $X_{p,\mu}$ is a derivative from the chain rule. Now we need to prove that $V_p = \mathrm{span}\left\{X_{p,\mu}\right\}$.

For any function $F: \mathbb R^n \to \mathbb R$, if $F$ is $C^\infty$,
$$
\forall a\in\mathbb R^n, \exists H_{a,\mu}(x\in \mathbb R^n) \in C^\infty, s.t.\\
F(x) = F(a) + \sum^n_{\mu=1}(x^\mu-a^\mu)H_{a,\mu}(x)\quad,
$$
especially, we have
$$\begin{align*}
H_{a,\mu}(a)  &= \lim_{x\to a} H_{a,\mu}(x)\\
          &= \frac{\partial}{\partial x^\mu}[F](a)\quad.
\end{align*}$$

Let $F= f\circ \psi^{-1}$, and $a=\psi(p)$ we have
$$\begin{align*}
f(q) &= f(p) + \sum^n_{\mu=1}(x^\mu \circ \psi(q)-x^\mu \circ \psi(p)) H_{\psi(p),\mu}(\psi(q))\quad.\\
H_{\psi(p),\mu}(\psi(p)) &= \frac{\partial}{\partial x^\mu}[F](\psi(p)) \\
      &= \frac{\partial}{\partial x^\mu}[f \circ \psi^{-1}](\psi(p)) \\
      &= X_{p,\mu}[f]\quad,
\end{align*}$$
where $x^\mu \circ \psi$ denotes $(x\mapsto x^\mu) \circ \psi$, that is, picking the $\mu$th element of the result.

For any $v \in V_p$, apply the functional,
$$\begin{align*}
v[f]&=\left.\cancel{v[f(p)]}
  + \sum^n_{\mu=1}v[x^\mu \circ \psi-\cancel{x^\mu \circ \psi(p)}]\cdot (H_{\psi(p),\mu}\circ\psi)(p) \\
  + \sum^n_{\mu=1}\cancel{\left(x^\mu \circ \psi(p)-x^\mu \circ \psi(p)\right)} v[H_{\psi(p),\mu}\circ\psi]\right.\quad, \\
  &= \sum^n_{\mu=1}v[x^\mu \circ \psi]X_{p,\mu}[f]\quad.
\end{align*}$$
This means $v[f]$ is a linear combination of $\{X_{p,\mu}[f]\}$. $\square$

---

The basis $\{X_\mu\}$ is called a ***coordinate basis***, frequently denoted as simply $\partial/\partial x^\mu$. For each different chart $\psi'$ chosen, there is a different coordinate basis $\{X'_\nu\}$, and
$$\begin{align*}
X'_{p,\nu}[f] &= \sum^n_{\nu=1} X'_{p,\nu}[x^\mu \circ \psi] X_{p,\mu}[f] \\
&= \sum^n_{\nu=1} \frac{\partial}{\partial x'^\nu}[x^\mu \circ \psi\circ\psi'^{-1}](\psi'(p)) X_{p,\mu}[f] \\
&= \sum^n_{\nu=1} \frac{\partial x^\mu}{\partial x'^\nu}(\psi'(p)) X_{p,\mu}[f]\quad, \\
X_{p,\mu} &= \sum^n_{\nu=1} \frac{\partial x'^\nu}{\partial x^\mu}(\psi(p)) X'_{p,\nu}\quad. \\
\end{align*}$$
We can also get the ***vector transformation law*** from it:
$$
v'^\nu=\sum^n_{\mu=1}v^\mu\frac{\partial x'^\nu}{\partial x^\mu}\quad.
$$

---

A smooth curve, $C$ on a manifold $M$ is a $C^\infty$ map of $\mathbb R$ into $M$, $C: \mathbb R \to M$. At each point $p \in M \cap C$, there is a tangent vector $T \in V_p$ associated with $C$ as follows.
$$\begin{align*}
T[f]&=\frac{d}{dt}[f\circ C] \\
    &=\sum_{\mu=1}^n \frac{d x^\mu}{dt}\frac{\partial}{\partial x^\mu}[f\circ \psi^{-1}] \\
    &=\sum_{\mu=1}^n\frac {dx^\mu}{dt} X_\mu(f)\quad.\\
\end{align*}$$
Therefore the components of $T$ is given by $$
T^\mu = \frac{dx^\mu}{dt}\quad.
$$

If $p$ and $q$ are on the manifold, there is no way to correlate them in a general manifold. Another construct ("connection", or "parallel transportation") must be introduced to do so. However, if the curvation is nonzero, the identification of $V_p$ with $V_q$ obtained in this manner will depend on the choice of curve.

---

A ***tangent field***, $v$, on a manifold $M$ is an assignment of a tangent vector, $v\vert_p \in V_p$ for each point $p \in M$. Despite the fact that the tangent spaces $V_p$ and $V_q$ at different points are different vector spaces, there is a natural notion of what it means for $v$ to vary smoothy from point to point.

---

A one-parameter group of diffeomorphisms $\phi_t$ is a $C^\infty$ map from $\mathbb R \times M \to M$. In particular:

1. $\forall \in\mathbb R, \phi_t$ is a diffeomorphism, and
2. $\forall s, t \in \mathbb R, \phi_{s+t} = \phi_s \circ \phi_t$.

At each point $p$, $\phi_t(p)$ is a curve, called the orbit of $\phi_t$ which passes through $p$ at $t=0$. Define $v|_p$ to be the tangent vector at $t=0$. Thus we can consider the vector field $v$ to be the generator of such a group.

Conversely, we can ask a question, that if given a vector field $v$, can we find a family of curves s.t. for each point $p \in M$, there is one and only one curve that passes through the point with the tangent vector equals to $v\vert_p$. The answer is yes.

Therefore we have a one-to-one mapping between a tangent field and a diffeomorphism. We can thus consider a tangent field to be a mapping of type $M \to M$:
$$
v|_p = \left.\frac{\mathrm d\phi_t(p)}{\mathrm dt}\right|_{t=0}
$$


---

Given two smooth vector fields $v$ and $w$, we can define the ***commutator field*** $[v, w]$ as follows:
$$
[v,w](f) = v(w(f)) - w(v(f))
$$

[next >](/read.php?page=wald-gr/gr-03)